 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DOUGLAS COUNTY PARKS & RECREATION DEPARTMENT 
ADULT SPORTS LEAGUES 
RULES & GUIDELINES 
  
 
Douglas County Parks & Recreation reserves the right to make any rule modifications or changes during 
the course of a season(s) whenever it deems them proper and/or necessary to the overall success of the 
league(s) and its participants. 
 
OBJECTIVE 
1. The objectives of the Douglas County Parks & Recreation Adult Sports Programs shall be to promote 
and conduct a positive leisure time activity, which encourages fitness, friendly competition, community 
camaraderie and an atmosphere conducive to fun, fellowship and clean sportsmanship. 
 
ENTRY FEE 
1. The entry fee shall be determined prior to each season’s start and shall depend upon such things as 
number of games played, cost of officials, awards and equipment necessary to operate the program.  An 
administrative fee and any estimated indirect or parks costs are also fixed into the fee of the program. 
 
2. All fees shall be payable to  Douglas County Parks & Recreation by an assigned deadline.  Failure to 
meet the registration deadline, including full payment, will result in the offending team being dropped 
from the league. 
 
3. No entry fee will be refunded once the schedules have been completed. 
 
4. Teams that participate in one or more games will automatically forfeit their right to reclaim any part of 
their entry fee if they decide to drop from the league. 
 
REGISTRATION 
 All leagues will be filled on a first come, first serve basis. 
 
Teams and players are not allowed to enter more than one local division.  Exception: Men’s or Women’s 
& Coed. 
 
PLAYER ELIGIBILITY 
1. All players must sign an official league roster prior to playing in any game.  Failure to sign a roster will 
declare that player inel igible for play.  Only players listed on the official roster will be considered 
eligible to play. 
 
2. Team rosters MUST be turned in to the Recreation Department before the second game.  Team rosters 
cannot be given to the officials. 
 
3. Teams will have until th e 4th week of the season to make any additions or modifications to their roster.  
New players must sign a roster before playing their first game and it must be turned into the Recreation 
Department prior to participation (blank rosters are available at the  Recreation Department or at 
www.dcprsports.com).    
 
4. If a player is injured during the course of a season and can no longer participate, a manager may delete 
the injured player from their roster and add another p layer to replace the injured player.  However, this 
may only be used if by deleting the injured player, it makes the roster drop below the minimum amount 
of players needed. 
 
5. Roster amounts shall be limited for the following per sport: 
 Flag Football – Minimum 6, Maximum 15 
 Soccer – Minimum 9, Maximum 20 
 Softball – Minimum 10, Maximum 20 
 Volleyball – Minimum 6, Maximum 12 
 
6. Players are not allowed to change team rosters once they have played in 1 game.   
7. PENALTY:  Player becomes ineligible to participate on any team during that season.  
 
8. Players must have played in a certain amount of games in order to be eligible for post -season play.  
Number of games played are as follows: 
 For 18 game schedules, players must have played at least 8 games 
 For 12 game schedules, players must have played at least 5 games 
 For 10 game schedules, players must have played at least 4 games 
 For 8 game schedules, players must have played at least 3 games 
 
FORMAT 
1. Douglas County Parks & Recreation will have jurisdiction over all rules and regulations herein not 
covered. 
 
2. Leagues are open only to those 18 years age and older.  Players must be able to provide proof identity 
and age with picture ID (at the game) if required by the Recreation Department or league official. 
 
3. Douglas County Parks & Recreation shall determine the number, variety and type of leagues, but teams 
may request league preference when they register, where applicable.  Team managers are encouraged to 
complete an end of season evaluation form to provide feedback on league format. 
 
4. Teams must play at the time, place and date specified by the Recreation Coordinator for each scheduled 
game. 
 
5. Game time is forfeit time as determined by the officials watch.  
 
6. The home team will be designated on the league schedule.  
 
7. When determini ng league standings, the following criteria will be used in order to break ties of 2 or 
more teams: 
 Head to Head play (win/lose record between teams tied) 
 Quality of opponents defeated (total number of defeated opponents wins) 
 If still tied, point/run/goal differential in head to head play, Maximum 10 pts on any contest 
 If still tied, point/run/goal differential in overall play, Maximum 10 pts on any contest. 
 If still tied, a best 2 out of 3 coin toss will be administered by the Recreation Department 
 
8. When determining post-season tournament seeding, final league standings will be used. 
 
9. All teams will be included in the post-season tournaments. 
 
10. The higher seed will be the home team in post-season play. 
 
11. In order to provide a more balanced league for better play and competition, any team that wins their 
division may be required to move up one division the next season (if applicable).  The Recreation 
Department will have final authority in league selection. 
 
 
12. Leagues will consist of a minimum amount of league games as follows: 
 Flag Football – 10 plus single elimination post-season tournament 
 Soccer – 8 plus single elimination post-season tournament 
 Softball – 8 (summer) & 8 (summer & fall) plus post-season tournament 
 Volleyball – 12 plus single elimination post-season tournament 
 Basketball – 8 plus single elimination post-season tournament. 
 
MANAGERS 
1. Each team manager or coach must designate a team captain to the official(s).  Only the team captain will 
be allowed to approach the officials concerning any dispute during the course of a game. 
 
2. Team managers are responsible for informing their team, players, representatives and spectators of all 
rules and guidelines stated within including code of conduct. 
 
AWARDS 
1. Awards will be distributed for Tournament play only for the following sports: 
Basketball, Softball, Flag Football, Soccer and Volleyball 
 Tournament awards consist of the following: 
Champions – 1st place award (gift cert. or trophy or plaque) & individual awards (t-shirts, etc.) 
Runner Up – 2nd place award for flights or divisions of more than 5 teams. 
 
 
PROTESTS 
1. As soon as a matter of protest arises during a game  (except softball, see softball rules ), the captain or 
manager of the protesting team must immediately notify the head official and opposing manager  prior to 
the next play or pitch and have it recorded in the official scorebook.  Failure to immediately notify the 
official(s) will nullify any protest.  In order to be legal, a written “Intent to Protest” must be filed.  The 
notice of intention is MANDATORY. 
 
2. A formal written protest must be turned into the Recreation Department, at 1329  Waterloo Lane, 
Gardnerville by 5:00pm the next business day.  A written formal protest must include the following: 
 Date 
 Time 
 Location of Game 
 Name of Official(s) & Scorekeepers (where applicable) 
 Score of the game 
 Time remaining in the game when infraction occurred 
 Official rule or local rule under which the protest is made 
 Conditions surrounding the decision 
 All the essential facts involved in the matter protested. 
 
2. A $ 50.00 protest fee must accompany all protests.  If the protest is declared valid, the fee will be 
returned and the game may be played over at the point of protest.  If the protest is declared invalid, the 
fee will be forfeited and the game will stand as play ed.  If player eligibility is successfully protested, a 
win will be awarded to the protesting team. 
 
3. Only protests regarding misinterpretation of rules and player eligibility shall be reviewed. 
 
4. If a person is found to be in violation of the player eligibi lity rule, that person may not be allowed to 
participate in any DCPRD sponsored sports programs for the remainder of the season . The protest 
committee will review the violation and determine the punishment.  The offending player is ineligible to 
participate until they have attended the disciplinary hearing and the protest is ruled on. 
 
5. The team manager who allows non -eligible players to participate may automatically be suspended for a 
minimum of two games or expelled indefinitely until conduct committee has reviewed the violation. 
 
6. Recreation Department staff shall review all protests.  All decisions will be final. 
 
CODE OF CONDUCT 
1. This league is intended to be for recreational purposes only. 
 
2. All players, managers, coaches and spectators must abide by the D ouglas County “Player Code of 
Conduct”.  It will be the manager’s responsibility to see that all players and spectators abide by the 
“Code of Conduct”. 
 
3. A player who is ejected from a game has five (5) minutes to leave the facility and parking lot for the 
game will be forfeited. 
 
4. A person (player, coach, or spectator) who is ejected from a game will be indefinitely suspended from 
all Douglas County Parks & Recreation sponsored activities until that person has met with the Conduct 
Committee.  An automatic on e game suspension will be instituted.  Any player suspended will not be 
allowed to be present at any games that they are suspended from. 
 
5. Any individual involved in a physical confrontation with a player, spectator, Douglas County employee 
or official may be suspended from all Douglas County Sponsored activities until the Conduct Committee 
has reviewed the incident. 
 
6. Please review the “Player’s Code of Conduct.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DOUGLAS COUNTY PARKS & RECREATION DEPARTMENT 
 
PLAYER CODE OF CONDUCT 
 
If any person involved in a Douglas County Parks & Recreation Department sponsored sports program 
commits any of the following offenses they will be suspended indefinitely from league play until the 
Conduct Committee has reviewed the incident and a penalty r elating to the violation has been applied.  
Any person who is ejected from a game will  be suspended an automatic one game.  A person (player, 
coach, and spectator) who is expelled from a program will not be allowed to attend any future programs 
until the Conduct Committee has reviewed the incident. 
 
1. No person shall at any time lay a hand upon, push, shove, strike or threaten another player, official or 
Douglas County Employee. 
 
2. No person shall refuse to abide by an official’s decision. 
 
3. No person may make derogatory remarks, gestures or tone of voice to the official(s) or Douglas County 
staff. 
 
4. No profane or obscene language shall be used. 
 
5. No person shall use unnecessary rough tactics in the play of a game against the body of person of an 
opposing team. 
 
6. No person shall make an abusive verbal attack upon an official, player, spectator or Douglas County 
employee. 
 
7. No person shall physically attack a player, official, spectator or Douglas County Employee. 
 
8. No person shall discuss any decision reached by an official, except the coach or captain. 
 
9. No person shall discuss his/her personal opinion of any player, any play or decision by an official 
publicly with spectators in a derogatory manner. 
 
10. No person shall ever follow an official or Douglas County employee wi thout his or her 
acknowledgement in an attempt to discuss an issue or incident. 
 
11. No person shall threaten or commit bodily harm or damage to personal property of an official, player, 
spectator or Douglas County Employee. 
 