 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 1 
 
 
 
 
AYSO 
Basic Soccer Rules 
 
For New AYSO Parents and Volunteers 

 
 
 
2 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The AYSO National Support & Training Center 
12501 South Isis Avenue 
Hawthorne, CA 90250 
TEL: 800.872.2976 
FAX: 310.643.5310 
Web site: www.ayso.org   
E-mail: registration@ayso.org 
All rights reserved. © 2010 American Youth Soccer Organization 
Reproduction in any form, whole or in part, without prior, expressed written 
permission of the American Youth Soccer Organization Programs Department is 
prohibited. 

Contents 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 3 
Contents 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 5 
 
AYSO VISION & MISSION 6 
 
THE SPIRIT OF THE GA ME AND PHILOSOPHY OF 
REFEREEING 7 
 
LAW 1: THE FIELD OF PLAY 8 
 
LAW 2: THE BALL 9 
 
LAW 3: THE NUMBER OF PLAYERS 10 
 
LAW 4: THE PLAYERS’ EQUIPMENT 13 
 
LAW 5: THE REFEREE 14 
 
LAW 6: THE ASSISTANT REFEREES 17 
 
LAW 7: THE DURATION OF THE MATCH 19 
 
LAW 8: THE START AND RESTART OF PLAY 21 
 
LAW 9: THE BALL IN AND OUT OF PLAY 23 
Contents 
 
 
4 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
LAW 10: THE METHOD OF SCORING 24 
 
LAW 11: OFFSIDE 25 
 
LAW 12: FOULS AND MISCONDUCT 27 
 
LAW 13: FREE KICKS 32 
 
LAW 14: THE PENALTY KICK 33 
 
LAW 15: THE THROW-IN 34 
 
LAW 16: THE GOAL KICK 35 
 
LAW 17: THE CORNER KICK 36 
 
Introduction 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 5 
Introduction 
 
Welcome to the AYSO family. Your participation is greatly appreciated. This booklet 
is intended as an introduction for those new to AYSO and new to the game of 
soccer. As a novice spectator or new volunteer in AYSO, t he information in this 
booklet will provide you with the most fundamental basics of the rules and is not 
intended as a complete or authoritative reference. For those interested in the 
complete rules, we recommend you obtain a current copy of the AYSO Natio nal 
Rules and Regulations and the latest AYSO edition of the Laws of the Game. Of 
course, the best way to learn more about the rules is to volunteer to be an AYSO 
referee or coach where you will receive the best training available and will be 
rewarded with years of enjoyment as an AYSO volunteer. 
AYSO matches are played in accordance with the current AYSO edition of the FIFA 
Laws of the Game and the AYSO National Rules and Regulations. The International 
Football Association Board (IFAB) meets yearly to cons ider modifications to the 
Laws, and FIFA (Fédération Internationale de Football Association), the governing 
body of worldwide soccer, publishes the Laws of the Game including Interpretation 
of the Laws of the Game and Guidelines for Referees annually which are binding on 
confederations and member associations as from 1 July following each Annual 
General Meeting of the IFAB. 
Since 1984 AYSO has been authorized to reprint the Laws. The AYSO edition of the 
Laws of the Game also includes certain “Rules of Competition and modifications,” as 
permitted by the IFAB. Subsequent to the AYSO National Annual General Meeting, 
the AYSO National Rules and Regulations are published, incorporating any changes 
approved at the NAGM. It is important that you have the most complete and recent 
information, and therefore, it is strongly recommended that you obtain current copies 
of these two booklets each year available from the AYSO Supply Center (888 243 
2976) in August. 
The United States Soccer Federation (USSF) is recognized by FIFA as the national 
governing body of soccer in the United States. AYSO is a National Association 
member of the USSF and a member of the Youth Council of USSF.  AYSO is the 
second largest member of USSF.  AYSO referees and coaches are encouraged to 
use USSF reference material, especially the Guide to Procedures – Referees, 
Assistant Referees, and Fourth Officials and the Advice to Referees on the Laws of 
the Game. However, where USSF materials differ from AYSO publications (AYSO 
National Rules and Regulations, AYSO National Policy Statements, AYSO National 
Referee and Coach Program materials and this Guidance for Referees and 
Coaches) the AYSO publications take precedence. 
AYSO Vision & Mission 
 
 
6 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
AYSO Vision & Mission 
 
The American Youth Soccer Organization, AYSO, was established in 1964 with nine 
teams and the dream to bring soccer to American children.  Today, AYSO has more 
than 60,000 teams and 600,000 players in nearly 1,000 Regions. Thanks to the 
efforts of over 250,000 volunteers and the vision of the founding members, AYSO 
continues to be a leader in providing quality youth soccer programs. 
AYSO Vision 
To provide world class youth soccer programs that enrich children’s lives. 
AYSO Mission 
To develop and deliver youth soccer programs in a fun, family environment based on 
the AYSO philosophies: 
• Everyone Plays: Our goal is for kids to play soccer–so we mandate that 
every player on every team must play at least half of every game. 
• Balanced Teams: Each year we form new teams as evenly balanced as 
possible–because it is fair and more fun when teams of equal ability play. 
• Open Registration: Our program is open to all children between 4 and 19 
years of age who want to register and play soccer. Interest and enthusiasm 
are the only criteria for playing. 
• Positive Coaching: Encouragement of player effort provides for greater 
enjoyment by the players and ultimately leads to better -skilled and better-
motivated players. 
• Good Sportsmanship: We strive to create a safe, fair, fun and positive 
environment based on mutual respect, rather than a win-at-all-costs attitude, 
and our program is designed to instill good sportsmanship in every facet of 
AYSO. 
Player Development: We believe that all players should be able to develop their 
soccer skills and knowledge to the best of their abilities, both individually and as 
members of a team, in order to maximize their enjoyment of the game. 
The Spirit Of The Game And Philosophy Of Refereeing 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 7 
The Spirit Of The Game 
And Philosophy Of 
Refereeing 
 
Soccer is designed as a players’ game and the involvement of non-players (coaches 
and referees) is intended to be limited. This can be a difficult concept for those 
accustomed to seeing active involvement by coaches and officials in other popular 
sports. Coaches participate in these other popular sports by directing the action of 
the players, debating rule decisions with officials or completely stopping the action 
by calling time-outs. Officials, in these other popular sports, participate by stopping 
the game for each rule violation and not continuing play until the infraction and 
violator have been identified, the punishment options explained to the opposing 
team and a final accounting of the entire incident announced or signaled to the 
spectators. Indeed, it is not uncommon in some sports for considerably more time to 
be devoted to dealing with these matters than is actually spent playing the game. 
The spirit of the game of soccer intends something quite different. 
In soccer, particularly youth soccer, the application of the spirit of the Law is far more 
important than the rote application of the letter of the Law. Soccer is a fast -paced 
game that should flow with a minimum of interruptions. Referees have considerable 
authority and flexibility when determining whether or not to stop play. Violation of the 
letter of the Law may be overlooked if the referee considers it to be a trifling or 
doubtful offense. The referee may also elect not to stop play for a foul when it would 
be more of an advantage to the team that was fouled to continue playing. It is easy 
to fall into the trap of becoming overly concerned with the details of various rules and 
regulations surrounding the game. Players simply want to get on with the enjoyment 
of playing. Standards that may seem appropriate to enforce during international, 
college or high school competitions are not necessarily appropriate to apply at all 
levels of youth soccer.  
Soccer is a game, and the reason people play games is to have fun. The role of 
AYSO coaches and referees is to facilitate a game that will provide the maximum 
enjoyment for the players. Understanding the spirit of the game and the philosophy 
of refereeing can significantly contribute toward the enjoyment of the match for all 
concerned—coaches, referees, spectators and players.  
Referees strive for uniformity of interpretation, just as players strive for excellence in 
playing skills and coaches strive to develop successful teams. With varying degrees 
of success, each does the best he or she can, and it is the inevitable human 
variation that makes for greater interest and enjoyment. 
Law 1: The Field Of Play 
 
 
8 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
Law 1: The Field Of Play 
 
Spirit of the Law 
The field of play must be safe for players. The goals and markings must be 
adequate for the referee to perform his duties and should not be confusing to the 
players. 
Safety 
The first concern of the coach and referee regarding the field is, obviously, safety. 
This applies to both practices and games. Common hazards such as holes, exposed 
rocks or sprinkler heads, broken glass and miscellaneous debris are fairly easily 
detected by walking over the field. Some of the less obvious hazards are associated 
with the goals. The goals must be inspected to ensure they are secured well enough 
that they will not collapse or be blown over by a strong gust of wind. The nets should 
also be secured. Loose netting can also present a hazard to players an d to 
goalkeepers in particular. Corner flagposts and halfway flagposts must be the 
minimum height (5’) and in good repair. 
 

Law 2: The Ball 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 9 
Law 2: The Ball 
 
Spirit of the Law 
The ball must be safe for the players and of appropriate size and weight. 
Size 
Proper size, weight and pressure as well as safety make up the checklist for the ball 
inspection. Size varies according to age group. The correct weight and pressure can 
be determined sufficiently by feel with some practice. 
 

Law 3: The Number Of Players 
 
 
10 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
Law 3: The Number Of 
Players 
 
Spirit of the Law 
Each team is entitled to begin play with a maximum of eleven (11) players and shall 
not continue play with fewer than seven (7). Exceptions in AYSO are permitted for 
small-sided games (see Short-Sided Games Guide for Referees). 
Maximum and Minimum 
Eleven-a-side is the norm, with a minimum of seven required. Fewer than that is 
allowed and strongly recommended for younger age groups. The AYSO National 
Coaching Program recommends 3-a-side for U-5 & U-6, 5-a-side for U-8, 7-a-side 
for U-10 and 9-a-side for U-12. A goal should be disallowed if it is determined that 
the team scoring the goal had more than the allowable number of players on the 
field at the time the goal was scored. This is true only if discovered by the referee 
before restarting play after the goal.  
Substitution 
In AYSO it is mandatory that all players who are present at the match play a 
minimum of one half of the game (the “Three Quarter Rule” is strongly encouraged 
which means no player on a team should play four ‘quarters’ in a given game, until 
all players on the team have played three ‘quarters’). Exceptions include: players 
arriving during the second or third ‘quarters’ must play a minimum of one ‘quarter’. 
Substitutions during regulation play in AYSO matches occur only at ‘quarters’ or 
following an injury. Substitution during ‘quarters’ is managed by the referee stopping 
play approximately midway into the first and second halves to allow substitutions to 
occur. In order to avoid interrupting play at inappropriate times, substitutions should 
occur at a normal stoppage such as a throw-in, goal kick, corner kick, etc. These 
stoppages seldom occur at exactly the midpoint of the half, so the referee will begin 
looking for a suitable stoppage during the period one minute before to one minute 
after the midpoint of the half. If no such stoppage occurs during this two -minute 
period, then the referee may stop play for substitutions and then restart play with a 
dropped ball at the location of the ball when play was stopped.  
Substitution stoppages are intended only to be a time for the quick substitution of a 
few players and are not intended as mini -halftime periods or opportunities for 
coaching or any other purpose that would unduly extend the time taken for the 
game. On exceptionally hot days, the referee may allow some additional time for 
players to hydrate. The only players entitled to leave the field are those being 
substituted for, and the only individuals entitled to enter the field are the new players. 
This entire process should take only about a minute or less. 
Law 3: The Number Of Players 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 11 
The referee or assistant referee must keep and submit a record of playing time on 
the lineup card, and if it appears that a player (or players) will not be substituted into 
the match after sitting out the entire first half or they have only one ‘quarter’ of 
playing time at the end of the third ‘quarter,’ the referee should inform the coach of 
the situation before starting play. If the coach still elects not to substitute the player 
or players into the match, the referee is not empowered to require the player(s) in 
question to play, as this is solely the coach’s decision. The referee should start play 
and must include the information in the game report for review and consideration by 
the governing authority (the region, area, section or tournament committee). 
Players sent off after the opening kick-off (including during half-time) may not be 
replaced by a substitute, and the players’ team must play with one less player. The 
players at the end of the half remain players until their substitutes have reported to 
the referee.  
Monitored (Free) Substitution 
For U-16 and U-19 age groups only, “Monitored Substitution” is allowed which 
means substitutions need not occur at pre-set intervals, provided a system is in 
place which will ensure that every participant plays at least one half of every game 
by requiring a separate time monitor, independent of either team or coach, who 
checks each player in or out of the game. It is the responsibility of the regional 
commissioner or the area director, as the case may be, to monitor this experimental 
program during the season.  
It is generally not the responsibility of referees to monitor playing time during games 
using monitored substitution, unless the region/area has developed modified lineup 
cards to check off substitutions by eighths, sixteenths or some substitution increment 
period other than quarters. Except as provided by the rules of the competition 
(region, area, section or tournament guidelines), monitored substitution, for U-16 and 
U-19 games only, may occur only at a stoppage in the match with the referee’s 
permission. 
Sanctioning bodies should take care not to establish procedures that will encourage 
the use of substitutions for delaying a match or limiting quick restarts.  Allowing 
unlimited substitutions during any stoppage of play can often lead to this situation 
and places undue pressure on the referee to limit these substitutions during a match.  
Similarly, restrictions may not be imposed upon referees that limit or restrict their 
authority to conduct a substitution. 
Injury Substitution 
In the case of an injury, there are two choices available to the team. The injured 
player may be substituted, in which case the injured player may not return during 
that ‘quarter,’ or the injured player may leave the field to recover and the team will 
play short until the injured player has recovered well enough to return to play with 
the referee’s permission.  
Only the injured player gets credit for playing the ‘quarter’ in which the injury 
occurred regardless of the total time played in that ‘quarter.’ The substitute replacing 
Law 3: The Number Of Players 
 
 
12 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
the injured player must still play a total of at least two additional ‘quarters’ to satisfy 
the AYSO requirement for all players to play at least one half of the game.  
Changing the Goalkeeper 
Goalkeepers may be substituted for as described above. Additionally, another player 
on the field may change places with the goalkeeper during a normal stoppage in 
play, provided that the referee is first informed. In youth soccer this sometimes 
occurs at the taking of a penalty kick, with the players again changing positions, 
following the same procedure, at a subsequent stoppage in play. The referee will 
normally not give permission for the change if it would be to the disadvantage of the 
attacking team wishing to take a quick  free kick or corner kick. Subsequent 
goalkeeper changes must also follow the same procedure. If a player changes 
places with the goalkeeper without the referee’s permission, the referee allows play 
to continue and then cautions both players during the next normal stoppage in play 
(due consideration being given according to the age group). 
 

Law 4: The Players’ Equipment 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 13 
Law 4: The Players’ 
Equipment 
 
Spirit of the Law  
The players of each team must be safely equipped and easily distinguished from the 
opposing team. 
Player Equipment 
According to the Laws of the Game, "A player must not use equipment or wear 
anything that is dangerous to himself or another player (including any kind of 
jewellery)". The basic compulsory equipment of a player includes: a jersey or shirt, 
shorts, stockings, footwear and shinguards. The shinguards need to provide a 
reasonable degree of protection and be covered entirely by the stockings.  
It is the responsibility of the referee to examine the players and their equipment and 
then make a decision regarding whether or not there is any danger to the player or 
to other players. The referee may delegate this inspection responsibility to one or 
both of the assistant referees. The referee has the obligation and right to disallow 
players from participation with anything dangerous depending upon the referee’s 
best judgment. AYSO neither endorses nor refutes the claims of companies that 
produce products intended to increase player safety. 
Uniform 
AYSO does not train referees to be fashion police, but we do expect the teams to be 
appropriately attired and equipped. The purpose of uniforms is to allow the teams to 
be easily distinguished from one another and for the goalkeepers to be further 
distinguished and recognizable. Players’ jerseys must be tucked inside their shorts. 
Articles worn for adornment that are not part of the team’s standard uniform are 
neither needed nor permitted. In colder times of the year, additional clothing may be 
desired by the players. With the younger divisions, some deviations are allowed as 
long as the extra articles of clothing present no safety hazard to either the wearer or 
to other players and the wearer’s team affiliation and player number remain 
recognizable. Sliding pants, compression shorts, boxer shorts or other types of 
garments worn under the soccer shorts that are exposed are not illegal but should 
be the same color as the shorts or as the predominant color of the shorts. Although 
opinions vary greatly as to the appropriateness, function and esthetic value of these 
items, they should not be disallowed in games unless the referee believes they 
present a safety hazard or that they are simply unnecessary adornment.  
Law 5: The Referee 
 
 
14 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
Law 5: The Referee 
 
Spirit of the Law 
The referee’s duty is to ensure the match is fun, fair and safe for the players. 
The foundation of the AYSO Referee Program is expressed by the following quote 
from section I.D.5 of the AYSO National Rules and Regulations: 
“The Laws of the Game are intended to provide that games should be played 
with as little interference as possible, and in this view it is the duty of referees 
to penalize only deliberate breaches of the Law. Constant whistling for trifling 
and doubtful breaches produces bad feeling and loss of temper on the part of 
the players and spoils the pleasure of spectators.” 
To paraphrase the words of the late, internationally renowned and respected referee 
and referee instructor, Mr. Ken Aston, “Soccer is like a play in two acts with the 
referee as the director. The drama contains the full spectrum of emotions including 
suspense, excitement, periods of calm followed by intense action. There are heroes 
and occasionally villains, and good performances building to a dramatic conclusion. 
A good director (referee) with well-coached actors (players) has the capability of 
creating a wonderful two-act play (game) that will be enjoyed by all who observe.”  
The referee is empowered by the Laws of the Game with considerably more latitude 
to allow play to continue even when an apparent infraction has occurred if, in his 
judgment, no significant advantage is gained from a trifling or doubtful offense or if 
stopping play for an infraction of the rules would, in fact, actually be an advantage to 
the team which committed the offense.  The Laws intend for the game to flow with a 
minimum of interruption, and the referee is charged with conducting the game 
accordingly. 
Referee Signals 
Signals, approved by the IFAB and universally in use, are illustrated in the Laws of 
the Game. The following quote from the 1996 edition of the Laws of the Game still 
applies today: 
While it is not the duty of the referee to explain or mime any offense that has caused 
him to give a particular decision, there are times when a simple gesture or word of 
guidance can aid communication and contribute to greater understanding and more 
respect, to the mutual benefit of referee and players. Improving communication 
should be encouraged, but the exaggerated miming of offenses can be undignified 
and confusing and should not be used. 
An indication by the referee of the point where a throw-in should be taken may well 
help prevent a player from taking a throw -in improperly. A call of “Play on, 
Advantage!” confirms to a player that the referee has not missed a foul but has 
instead chosen to apply advantage (see Law 5). Even an indication that the ball was 
Law 5: The Referee 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 15 
minutely deflected by its touching another player on its path across a touchline, 
might be helpful in generating a greater understanding between referee and players. 
A better understanding will lead to more harmonious relationships. 
All signals given by the referee should be simple, clear and instinctive. They should 
be designed to control the game efficiently and to ensure continuous play as far as 
possible; they are intended essentially to indicate what the next action in the game 
should be, not principally to justify that action.  
An arm pointing to indicate a corner kick, goal kick or foul, and the direction in which 
it is to be taken, will normally be sufficient. The raised arm to indicate that a free kick 
is indirect is clearly understood, but if a player queries politely whether the award is 
a direct free kick or an indirect free kick, a helpful word from the referee, in addition 
to the appropriate signal, will lead to a better understanding in the future. 
For an indirect free kick, the referee is required by the Laws of the Game to signal by 
holding his arm in the air and keeping it in this position until the ball is touched or 
played by another player, or the ball goes out of play. This serves as a reminder to 
players, coaches, spectators and the referee that a goal may not be scored directly 
from an indirect free kick. For less experienced players’ games it is also helpful for 
the referee to help players learn that the raised referee hand means the kick is 
indirect. 
Advantage  
The Advantage Clause, in the Laws of the Game, instructs the referee, in the 
interest of the flow of the game, to not stop play for an infraction when the referee 
believes that it would be more of an advantage for the team that was fouled to allow 
play to continue.  If, after allowing Advantage, the advantage does not materialize 
within about 3 seconds, the referee should stop play and award the free kick. 
If, during this time, a second offense is committed by a teammate of the player who 
committed the first offense, the referee must sanction the more serious of the two 
offenses or again apply advantage. 
The Diagonal System of Control  
The diagonal system of control is the only system for officiating outdoor soccer 
games recognized by FIFA and AYSO. This system employs three officials, one 
referee and two assistant referees. In addition to being the universally approved 
method of officiating outdoor matches, the diagonal system is an effective method 
for increasing the number and retention of referees by recruiting,  training and 
assigning them first as assistant referees. 
The use of the dual refereeing system is not an approved technique for officiating 
AYSO games. The dual refereeing system uses two referees on the field, each with 
a whistle. This system encourages the development of poor officiating habits and is 
the source of frustrations as the officials attempt the impossible task of remaining 
close to play and, at the same time, being correctly positioned to watch for offside 
infractions. This system also fosters hesitancy on the part of the officials and 
unnecessary interruptions in play as the two officials attempt to consult with one 
another for a consensus in making calls. 
Law 5: The Referee 
 
 
16 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
If only two qualified officials are available for a match, one should assume the duties 
of the referee and the other should become an assistant referee. A volunteer club 
linesman, if available, after receiving instructions from the referee, should also be 
used. The only duty of a club linesman is to indicate when the ball has completely 
crossed the touchline or the goal line. If no club linesman can be found, the referee 
must assume the duties of the missing assistant referee, just as he or she would if 
working the game alone. 
Sideline Behavior by Coaches and Spectators  
AYSO coaches and referees (and all other AYSO volunteers) have a responsibility 
to provide a fun, pleasant environment for the players. According to the AYSO 
National Rules and Regulations, it is the duty of each coach, referee and official to 
“conduct him/herself in a manner becoming a member of AYSO”, “comply with the 
AYSO Rules and Regulations”, “encourage clean competition and good 
sportsmanship”, prohibit negative comments and complaints about officiating” and 
“present a healthy, athletic environment for team members by neither consuming 
alcoholic beverages nor using tobacco products during practices or games or in the 
immediate vicinity of the soccer fields.” Coaches must also “Limit his/her sideline 
participation during AYSO games to comments that are positive, instructional and/or 
encouraging”.  
Additionally, coaches and referees must work together to ensure the comments and 
behavior of spectators are within the boundaries of the AYSO philosophical tenets. 
Comments and behavior that may be common at the high school, colle ge or 
professional level are often not appropriate in youth sports. Referees are authorized 
to stop, suspend or terminate play for outside interference of any kind. AYSO is 
about ‘kids first and soccer second.’  
Cooperation between coaches and referees is essential in maintaining an 
appropriate environment for the players. The lessons young players learn from the 
behavior coaches and referees demonstrate will long endure after win/loss records 
are forgotten. 
Law 6: The Assistant Referees 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 17 
Law 6: The Assistant 
Referees 
 
Spirit of the Law 
The assistant referees assist the referee in officiating the match. 
‘Running the line’ as an assistant referee is a demanding task when done correctly, 
and is not easily mastered. The assistant referees must follow the lead and 
instructions of the referee. Their positions are determined by the position of the 
players, ball and instructions of the referee, and they must be ready to adjust based 
on the constantly changing conditions during play. They are also expected to judge 
misconduct or fouls out of sight of the referee and, when these activities occur, to 
bring them to the attention of the referee.  
Assistant Referee Signals  
Signals, approved by the IFAB and universally in use, are also illustrated in the Laws 
of the Game. Standardized flag signals are used to avoid confusion. Additional 
communication with the referee is also made through frequent eye contact and by 
other accepted signals agreed upon during the referee’s pre-game instructions. 
Club Linesmen 
Club Linesmen are sometimes used when neutral assistant referees are not 
available. Club Linesmen are usually selected from volunteers present at the game 
and often are supporters of one of the clubs or teams playing in the game, thus the 
derivation of the name ‘Club Linesmen.’ Because of their lack of official training, 
Club Linesmen have very limited responsibilities.  
To acquire the most effective cooperation from Club Linesmen, the following 
procedure shall be adopted: 
• The Club Linesmen shall report to the referee before the start of the game for 
instructions. The referee shall inform them that, regardless of their personal 
opinion, the referee’s decision is final and must not be questioned. 
• Their work as Club Linesmen is to signal when the ball is entirely over the 
touchline or goal line subject always to the final decision of the referee. 
• Keeping in mind their distinct duties as outlined above, the referee shall 
decide beforehand exactly what he requires of the Club Linesmen and, as 
head of the trio, tell them clearly how they can best assist him. The three 
officials must therefore confer before the game, and the referee’s instructions 
must be specific in order to avoid confusion. The Club Linesmen must, for 
their part, fully appreciate the referee’s authority and accept the referee’s 
Law 6: The Assistant Referees 
 
 
18 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
ruling without question should there be any difference of opinion among them. 
They must be supportive and never contradict his decisions. They are to 
assist, not insist. 
 
 
 

Law 7: The Duration Of The Match 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 19 
Law 7: The Duration Of 
The Match 
 
Spirit of the Law 
The players are entitled to the entire designated playing time. 
Adding Time 
Referees have sole responsibility for maintaining an accurate accounting of playing 
time. Additional time may be added by the referee to make up for any time lost due 
to injury, substitution, unusual delay, time-wasting tactics or any other cause. It is the 
referee’s responsibility to determine when these particular events have occurred and 
to add time for the time lost.  
Time should not be added (or the ‘clock stopped’) following a goal or to administer a 
caution or a send-off, or other such stoppages unless the delay is, in the opinion of 
the referee, unusually long. The time needed to attend to an injured player on the 
field as well as the time needed to make substitutions at the ‘quarters’ is easily 
determined and should be added. However, determining what constitutes an 
unusual delay or time-wasting tactic requires more careful consideration by the 
referee. An unusual delay would involve such things as retrieving a lost ball, 
removing an outside agent (dog, spectator, elephant, etc.) from the field or rain 
delay.  
Referees are trained not to be influenced by the emotions of the moment when 
determining whether or not to add on time. Referees must consider what is fair for 
BOTH teams in determining the exact moment to end the half or the game. For 
example, a player on a breakaway attack on goal at the end of an exciting match 
with the score tied should not be given extra time to see if the player scores or not. 
Similarly, the referee should not stop the clock because the team that is winning is 
not rushing to put the ball into play near the end of the game. In general, the referee 
will not add time at the end of the match for an event for which he or she would not 
have added time had it occurred at the beginning of the game. The ball does not 
have to be in play for the game to end. 
Wasting Time Versus Consuming Time 
Referees are also taught to distinguish between time-wasting and time-consuming 
tactics, the former being illegal and the latter legal. Time wasting would involve 
techniques used by one team to waste time that the opposing team has no 
opportunity to counter. A goalkeeper refusing to release the ball into play within six 
seconds or a team taking an unusually long time to put the ball into play on a given 
restart are examples of time wasting. In such situations, the opposing team is 
powerless to prevent the situation and must rely on the referee to intervene. On the 
other hand, a team may legally consume time by simply skillfully controlling the ball.  
Law 7: The Duration Of The Match 
 
 
20 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
Kicking the ball out of play can be interpreted as legal time consumption or illegal 
time wasting depending on the circumstances. Kicking the ball out of play is often a 
good defensive decision and should not be penalized. However, if in the opinion of 
the referee, the player kicking the ball out of play is intentionally using excessive 
force so that the kick causes an unusual delay in retrieving the ball, this could be 
considered an illegal time-wasting tactic. 
 
 
 

Law 8: The Start And Restart Of Play 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 21 
Law 8: The Start And 
Restart Of Play 
 
Spirit of the Law 
Neither team shall have an unfair advantage at the start of play.  
Starting Time and Forfeits 
If one or both teams are not present with the minimum number of players at the 
scheduled starting time, the referee should wait the time specified in the rules of the 
competition and then abandon the match. If the rules of competition do not specify a 
time, the referee should wait 15 minutes and then abandon the match. The referee 
may not declare a forfeit but must make a full report to the appropriate authorities, 
who will decide what action is to be taken. 
Coin Toss 
To begin the game, the team winning the coin toss chooses which goal they will 
attack in the first half, and the other team must kick off (the same procedure applies 
to a first overtime period when required). When kicks from the penalty mark are 
needed to determine a winner, another coin toss is conducted at the end of 
regulation play and/or the last overtime period. The team winning this coin toss has 
the choice whether to take the first or second kick. 
Kick-Off 
Starting play with a kick-off is a relatively simple process and should not present 
significant difficulties. Remember, the ball is not in play until it has been kicked and 
moves forward. It is not uncommon for the opposing team, upon hearing the whistle 
for the kick-off, to immediately run into the center circle rather than waiting for the 
ball to be kicked into play. The correct restart in this case is to retake the kick-off.  
Dropped Ball 
The dropped ball is used to restart play after the referee has stopped play for some 
neutral reason such as an injury, interference by an outside agent or when play is 
stopped for substitution with the ball still in play. The dropped ball should not be 
used to restart play when it is not obvious who last played the ball before it went out 
of play. Referees must make a decision.  
When having a dropped ball, although not required, referees usually will wait until 
one player from each team has taken up position to attempt to kick at the ball and 
then will instruct the players to wait until the ball hits the ground before commencing 
the kicking. If the ball is kicked before it has touched the ground, the dropped ball 
must be retaken. The referee may remind the players to be good sports and try not 
to kick each other. 
Law 8: The Start And Restart Of Play 
 
 
22 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
Common Elements of Restarts 
There are a total of eight different ways to restart play, and for each restart except 
the dropped ball the player restarting play may not touch or play the ball a second 
time until it has been touched or played by at least one additional player from either 
team. The dropped ball is the exception because it is the referee who is restarting 
play. 
 
 

Law 9: The Ball In And Out Of Play 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 23 
Law 9: The Ball In And Out 
Of Play 
 
Spirit of the Law 
The ball remains in play even if an assistant referees has signaled, unless the 
referee has signaled it out of play or has stopped play. 
Ball in Play  
The Laws of the Game state that for the following restarts the ball is in play when it 
is kicked and moves: free kicks outside the penalty area, indirect free kicks by the 
attacking team within their opponents' penalty area and corner kicks.  The Un ited 
States Soccer Federation's Advice to Referees states that "The distance to be 
moved is minimal and the ‘kick’ need only be a touch of the ball with the foot in a 
kicking motion." "The referee must make the final decision on what is and is not 
‘kicked and moved’ based on the spirit and flow of the match”. It is important to 
always remember that referees should not interfere with play for trifling or doubtful 
offences. This also applies to kick -offs and penalty kicks, with the additional 
requirement that movement must be in a forward direction. 
Ball out of Play 
It is the position of the ball, and not that of the player, that determines when the ball 
is out of play. This concept is somewhat foreign because the reverse is true in other 
popular sports such as football and basketball. It is also sometimes difficult to resist 
the temptation to think the ball is out of play when it touches a goal line or touchline, 
but we need to remember that the entire ball must cross the entire line before it is 
out. Position is critical when judging this fact, and in the vast majority of situations, 
we should thank the assistant referee for being in the best position to make this 
decision.  
Curving balls from corner kicks or kicked from near the touchlines or goal lines may 
briefly cross the outside plane of the line in the air and then return within the playing 
field. In these situations, the ball should be declared out of play and the appropriate 
restart taken. 
Law 10: The Method Of Scoring 
 
 
24 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
Law 10: The Method Of 
Scoring 
 
Spirit of the Law 
The referee will award a goal when the entire ball enters the goal except as 
otherwise provided by the Laws of the Game. 
Goal Versus No Goal 
If a player kicks the ball into the goal making the net bulge to withstand the impact, 
most will realize a goal has been scored. However, goals are not always so obvious. 
For those less than obvious goals, we must frequently rely on the correct positioning 
and judgment of the assistant referee, who will apply the same set of criteria used to 
determine when the ball is out of play together with the fact that it has left the field 
between the goalposts and under the crossbar. The best seat in the house to judge 
this is occupied by the assistant referee looking directly down the goal line.  
One circumstance under which a goal can be scored that is not obvious occurs 
when the goalkeeper attempts to stop a particularly hard shot that causes the 
goalkeeper to retreat sufficiently back across the goal line that the ball completely 
crosses the goal line for a brief period while in the possession of the goalkeeper. 
 

Law 11: Offside 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 25 
Law 11: Offside 
 
Spirit of the Law 
A player may not participate or interfere with play from an offside position. 
Origin 
The late Ken Aston, internationally renowned referee instructor, gave the following 
account of the origin of the Offside Law.  
Many years ago there was not an offside law in soccer. In the English schools where 
soccer was often played, it was noticed that players who were not willing to work 
with their teammates to help advance the ball would simply loiter around in front of 
the opponents’ goal waiting for the ball to arrive so they could score a goal.  
The schoolmasters determined this was not a sporting thing to do and therefore 
made a rule that any player guilty of this offense would be temporarily off their side 
(off the team) and not allowed to play. Thus, the Offside Law was born. As a point of 
interest, Ken would point out there is no “s” at the end of the term offside—since a 
player plays for only one side (team), he can be taken off only one side (team), not 
off both sides. 
Application 
The argument is sometimes made that a player who is standing in an offside 
position, even though inactive, is a cause for concern or worry on the part of the 
opposing goalkeeper or defender and therefore this can be interpreted as 
participation. This argument is not considered valid because referees cannot base 
their decisions on what is in the minds of players but rather must make their 
decisions based on what has, in fact, actually occurred. If players were penalized 
because they caused the opponents to worry about them because of what they 
might be able to do, this would have eliminated a lot of great players from the game. 
Do you think opposing teams had cause for concern or worry when they were about 
to play against great players such as Pelé or Mia Hamm? 
As an example, consider the following: A player with the ball is near the opposing 
team’s corner flag. The opposing goalkeeper is anticipating the ball being passed in 
front of the goal and has positioned himself close to the near goalpost and out from 
the goal line about two yards, which is close to where an opposing attacking player 
is legally positioned waiting for the ball. Another attacking player has taken an 
offside position inside the far goalpost on the goal line behind the goalkeeper. The 
ball is centered to the legally positioned teammate who, to the goalkeeper’s dismay, 
heads the ball just inside the near goalpost. This goal should be allowed (and 
applauded) if the player in the offside position did not actively interfere with play or 
an opponent, despite proximity to the goalkeeper.  But what if..., begin the dissenting 
Law 11: Offside 
 
 
26 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
voices. The ‘what ifs’ would each be considered separately, but in the situation 
described, a goal should be awarded.  
If the assistant referee does not raise the flag immediately when a player is in an 
offside position, players, coaches and spectators need not get upset. The assistant 
referee is properly waiting to assess whether or not the player in an offside position 
becomes involved in active play. By using a brief delay and observing the caution “If 
in doubt, don’t signal,” assistant referees do not stop the game need lessly.  
Furthermore, the referee is not obligated to accept the assistant referee’s 
recommendation to make the offside call, and may “wave off” the assistant referee’s 
flag.  Accordingly, players should continue to play the ball until the referee has 
determined that an offside offense has occurred. 
The Offside Law always seems a source of debate and controversy as it contains 
elements of fact and of judgment which the referee must consider and interpret. 
There are additional criteria the referee must consider in some situations which are 
best learned through demonstration under the direction of a competent referee 
instructor. 
 

Law 12: Fouls And Misconduct 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 27 
Law 12: Fouls And 
Misconduct 
 
Spirit of the Law 
Teams that fail to play in a sporting, fair and safe manner will be penalized. 
Referees and coaches want the game to be enjoyable at all levels of play. Player 
enjoyment and deliberate fouling are not compatible. Coaches, through their 
teachings and behavior, set the tone for fair play, sporting behavior and injury 
prevention by reinforcing the importance of fair play at all practices and games. 
Referees must walk the fine line between letting the game flow without unnecessary 
interruption and knowing when to interfere with the action to keep play within the 
boundaries of fairness and safety. Coaches and referees must work together to 
ensure players learn and abide by the Laws of the Game and respect the principles 
of fair play and sporting behavior. 
Direct Free Kick Fouls Most Frequently Debated 
Direct Free Kick Fouls are rare with the younger players whose actions are more 
often clumsy; rather than careless, reckless, or using excessive force. With older 
players, the game becomes more intense, and challenges for the ball often involve 
vigorous contact between players. The referee must judge the manner in which the 
contact is made. The fact that players may get knocked to the ground or bumped off 
the ball does not necessarily mean a foul has occurred. It is not a democracy; only 
the referee decides foul or no foul, even if in the minority. There are 10 Direct Free 
Kick fouls; the following four are most frequently debated. 
Handling the Ball 
Handling the ball is arguably the source of most confusion. Referees must judge 
whether the contact of ball and hand or arm was caused by a deliberate act of the 
player or if the ball struck the hand or arm in the normal course of play. If the referee 
feels the contact was not deliberate, then no foul has occurred and play should 
continue. It matters not that an advantage might have been gained as long as the 
contact of ball and hand or arm was not deliberate. 
Tripping 
There is a difference between tripping and being tripped. When a player stumbles or 
falls the referee must judge whether or not an opponent illegally tripped the player or 
if the trip was the result of a fair challenge for the ball. 
Often when a fair tackle is made, with contact first being made with the ball, the 
opponent may trip over the extended legs of the player making the tackle. However, 
even though contact is first made with the ba ll, if the player making the tackle 
Law 12: Fouls And Misconduct 
 
 
28 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
subsequently lifts his or her leg with the intent to cause the opponent to fall, it is a 
foul and a direct free kick or penalty kick must be awarded to the opposing team. 
A player who tackles an opponent, in a manner that endangers the safety of the 
opponent, must be sent off for serious foul play. 
Charging 
A legal charge is an attempt to physically separate an opponent from control of the 
ball. Charging while contending for the ball is fair providing the following conditions 
are met: 
• The player being charged is within playing distance of the ball 
• The charge is a sharp staccato impact, not a push 
• When charging from the side, contact is made as near shoulder to shoulder as 
possible, depending upon the relative heights of the players involved 
• If the charge is made in a manner that the referee considers to be careless, 
reckless or using excessive force, a direct free kick or penalty kick, as 
appropriate, is awarded to the opposing team. 
• If the charge is otherwise fair, but not made within playing distance of the ball, 
the charging player is called for impeding the progress of an opponent, and an 
indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team. 
Screening or Shielding 
Players may often place themselves between an opponent and the ball to screen or 
shield the ball. This is a legal tactic provided the ball is, in the opinion of the referee, 
within playing distance of the player. If a player while screening or shielding the ball 
illegally uses his or her hands, arms, legs or body (pushing, holding, etc.) to prevent 
an opponent from challenging for the ball, it is a direct free kick foul. 
Tackling 
Legal tackling is the act of blocking the ball or moving the ball away from the feet of 
an opponent in a manner that is not dangerous to that opponent. Players controlling 
the ball with their feet may be tackled by an opponent who is attempting to 
dispossess them of the ball. If contact that the referee considers to be careless, 
reckless or using excessive force is made with the player being tackled, then a free 
kick may be awarded plus possibly a caution (yellow card) or send off (red card) 
depending on the circumstances. In some cases, contact with the player after the 
ball has been played may also be a foul, again depending upon the circumstances. 
Indirect Free Kick Fouls Most Frequently Debated 
Indirect free kick fouls result in an indirect free kick rather than a direct free kick as 
the penalty. The following two indirect free kick fouls are the frequent source of 
debate: 
Law 12: Fouls And Misconduct 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 29 
Impeding 
Impeding the progress of an opponent, like charging, has a negative connotation 
and, like charging, can be legal or illegal depending upon the circumstances. 
Impeding involves using one’s body to prevent an opponent’s access to the ball. The 
terms ‘shielding’ or ‘screening’ are also used to describe a legal tactic employed by 
players to deny opponents access to the ball. In order for impeding, shielding or 
screening to be legal, the ball must be within playing distance of the player shielding 
the ball. It is not necessary for the player to be touching the ball with his feet as long 
as it remains within playing distance.  It is not uncommon for impeding to begin 
legally and quickly evolve to illegal pushing or holding. 
Dangerous Play 
Although the Laws of the Game state that an indirect free kick is awarded to the 
opposing team if a player, in the opinion of the referee, plays in a dangerous 
manner, the indirect free kick must be awarded only if an opponent is involved and 
the act is dangerous to either the player or to the opponent. If the dangerous act 
does not involve an opponent and play is stopped, play must be restarted with a 
dropped ball. 
Goalkeeper Possession 
The goalkeeper is considered to be in control of the ball by touching it with any part 
of his hand or arms. Possession of the ball includes the goalkeeper deliberately 
parrying the ball, but does not include the circumstances where, in the opinion of the 
referee, the ball rebounds accidentally from the goalkeeper, for example after he has 
made a save. 
The ball is also considered to be in the possession of the goalkeeper when 
• bouncing the ball and catching it  
• throwing the ball in the air and catching it  
A goalkeeper who moves outside his or her own penalty area to intercept the ball 
and play it with his or her feet, back into the penalty area may then handle the ball, 
unless the ball was deliberately kicked directly to the goalkeeper by a teammate or 
the goalkeeper received the ball directly from a throw-in taken by a teammate. 
If a teammate, taking a throw-in, throws the ball in the general direction of the 
goalkeeper, but before the goalkeeper receives the ball, it is intercepted in the air 
and headed by another teammate, the goalkeeper is allowed to handle the ball 
within his or her own penalty area. 
Temporary Expulsions 
If a player cannot control his or her emotions and needs a ‘time -out’ to regain 
control, either the player must recognize this and request permission to leave the 
field of play or the coach should convince the player to do so. Players have the right 
to ask the referee for permission to leave the field of play for a variety of reasons, 
and the referee should grant this permission. Coaches also have the right to ask 
Law 12: Fouls And Misconduct 
 
 
30 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
their players to request this option from the referee. In no case is a s ubstitution 
allowed to replace these players for this temporary interruption in their play.  
Coaches also have the right to call players to the touchline during play if they feel 
the need to tell them something or to ‘calm them down’, but the player must remain 
on the field of play. Giving the coach this responsibility, which is where it belongs, is 
not a violation of the Laws. 
FIFA has expressly forbidden mandatory temporary expulsions, sometimes called 
“sit outs”, by a referee for cautioned players to regain their composure or to ‘cool off.’ 
Serious Foul Play 
It is serious foul play, a sending-off offense, when a player uses deliberate violence 
when challenging for the ball against an opponent on the field of play while the ball is 
in play. 
Violent Conduct 
It is violent conduct, a sending-off offense, when a player is guilty of aggression 
toward an opponent when not challenging for the ball. If the ball is in play, a direct 
free kick or a penalty kick, as appropriate, is awarded in favor of the team of the 
player against whom the aggression was directed. If the ball is out of play, the match 
is resumed with the appropriate restart. 
It is also violent conduct if a player, substitute or substituted player attacks a 
teammate, the referee, an assistant referee, a coach, a spectator or any other 
person. If the ball is in play, an indirect free kick is awarded against the team of the 
player committing the violent conduct. If the aggression took place outside the 
boundaries of the field of play, a dropped ball is the correct restart. If the ball is out of 
play, the match is resumed with the appropriate restart. 
Cautions (Yellow Cards) and Send-Offs (Red Cards) 
A player, substitute or substituted player who is cautioned or sent off during the 
match is shown the yellow or red card, as appropriate. Cards are only shown to 
players, substitutes and substituted players. The referee has the authority to take 
disciplinary sanctions and show the red or yellow cards from the moment he or she 
enters the field of play prior to the game until he or she leaves the field of play 
following the final whistle. The purpose of a caution is to give players fair notice that 
the manner in which they are playing or behaving is unacceptable and that they will 
be sent off the field for the remainder of the game if they continue to play or behave 
in this way. The referee may offer a verbal reprimand or warning, which is not an 
official caution, and in this case, will not hold up a yellow card. 
The cards are never shown to coaches or spectators fo r their misconduct. The 
referee may, however, expel team officials from the field of play and its immediate 
surroundings without displaying a card. The referee’s report (in accordance with 
region, area or section procedures, as appropriate) must indicate i n detail all 
misconduct occurring before, during and after the match. 
Law 12: Fouls And Misconduct 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 31 
Children who are under 12 years of age should not be formally cautioned or sent off 
unless there are exceptional circumstances. Referees should consider whether 
children in this age group are fully aware of their actions and should consult and 
work with the coach to get the desired behavior. Young players can usually be 
controlled by a verbal admonishment, thus avoiding the need to display the cards. 
In the case of players being sent off (red carded) for misconduct after the game has 
started, substitution is not permitted for that player and the team must play with one 
less player for the duration of the match.  The player that was sent off receives a 
minimum one game suspension and additional sanctions may be imposed pending 
review by the governing authority. As with cautioning, sending off young players 
should be avoided. 
Administering Cautions and Send-Offs 
Referees, when administering cautions or send-offs, should  
• treat the individual in a calm, courteous and respectful manner 
• try to take the player or team official aside so he or she is out of the direct 
earshot of other players, team officials and spectators 
• explain briefly the reason he or she is being cautioned, sent off or expelled 
• display the yellow or red card, in the case of players, substitutes or substituted 
players 
• avoid a protracted discussion with the person being cautioned, sent off or 
expelled 
Although the Laws of the Game require that “a player who has been sent off must 
leave the vicinity of the field of play and the technical area” youth players who are 
sent off must be allowed to remain on the sideline, under the control of their coach 
unless their parents are present. 
Spectator Misconduct 
The model set by the adults present (referees, coaches and spectators) at games 
influences the development and behavior of the young players watching. The referee 
team establishes the parameters of acceptable behavior and must be attentive to 
and deal appropriately with any adult behavior that does not present positive role 
modeling for youth. Law 5 and AYSO National Rules and Regulations provide this 
authority.  
The influence adults have on the impressionable young players in AYSO will far 
outlast the memories of win/loss records. The behavior modeled by the adults 
present at AYSO games should have a positive effect on the development of the 
players watching. All adults present at AYSO games share in the responsibility to 
ensure positive role modeling is demonstrated. However the ultimate responsibility 
rests with the AYSO referees as the guardians of the game to ensure there is truth in 
the motto that…   
“In AYSO, it’s about more than the game!” 
Law 13: Free Kicks 
 
 
32 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
Law 13: Free Kicks 
 
Spirit of the Law 
Free kicks are to be taken without interference from the opposing team. 
Application 
Free kicks generally are either ceremonial kicks or quick kicks. The ceremonial kick 
occurs when the team awarded the kick elects to take its time before taking the kick, 
possibly to attempt a set play learned in practice. It is the duty of the referee to 
enforce the Law and ensure that the opponents retreat the required distance as 
quickly as possible.  
Conversely, it is the kicking team’s right to put the ball into play quickly and thus take 
advantage of an opportunity to advance the ball or to score a goal before the 
opposing defenders can get organized. In this situation, the team taking the kick may 
elect to kick the ball before the opponents have retreated the required distance. The 
quick-kick option is the choice of the team taking the kick and is perfectly legal as 
long as the ball is placed correctly, it is stationary before it is kicked and the referee 
has not told the kicking team to wait for his signal. 
 

Law 14: The Penalty Kick 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 33 
Law 14: The Penalty Kick 
 
Spirit of the Law 
A penalty kick is awarded the offended team when a defending player commits a 
direct free kick foul within his own penalty area. 
Application 
A penalty kick provides an excellent goal-scoring opportunity, and this is precisely 
the intent of the Law. Direct free kick fouls, when committed by the defense close to 
their goal (inside the penalty area), seriously hinder the attacking team’s chances of 
scoring a goal. Thus the Penalty Kick Law was devised to provide an additional 
measure of deterrence for committing direct free kick fouls near one’s own goal. In 
the younger age divisions, direct free kick fouls are rare, and the use of penalty kicks 
should likewise be rare at this level of play.  
The penalty kick is one of the few times players must wait for the referee’s signal 
(whistle) before restarting play so that the referee can ensure that all the players are 
first legally positioned outside the penalty area and the penalty arc and no closer to 
the goal line than the ball. Once the referee has given the signal for the penalty kick 
to be taken, the kick will not be interrupted by the referee if an infraction is 
committed by either team until the outcome of the kick is determined. The resulting 
action of the referee will depend upon the circumstances of which team committed 
the infraction and whether or not a goal was scored.  
Penalty Kick–Goalkeeper Movement 
At the taking of a penalty kick, or kicks from the penalty mark, goalkeepers must 
remain on the goal line, facing the kicker, but may move laterally along the goal line, 
between the goalposts, until the ball is kicked. If the goalkeeper moves forward off 
the goal line before the ball is kicked and the shot does not score, the penalty kick 
must be retaken. 
Law 15: The Throw-In 
 
 
34 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
Law 15: The Throw-In 
 
Spirit of the Law 
When the ball completely crosses the touchline, it shall be thrown back into the field 
of play by a player of the team opposite to that of the player who last touched it. 
Application 
The throw-in is one of the simplest and most common restarts and should not be the 
source of any unusual problems. The ball is thrown in from where it left the field and 
the opposing team is required to retreat at least two meters (yards) from the point at 
which the throw-in is to be taken. The Thrower may not play the ball twice in 
succession (cannot throw the ball to oneself). 
There have developed over the years some misconceptions regarding the throw-in. 
One of the most common misconceptions is that spin on the ball is illegal. This is not 
the case, and in fact, it is almost impossible to throw the ball without some measure 
of spin. In reality, side spin on the ball is generally an indication that the ball has 
slipped through the hands of the thrower and the ball is not thrown as far or as 
accurately as the thrower intended. The ball can generally be thrown farther with one 
hand than it can with two, and this is what is considered illegal. It is the referee’s 
duty to determine if this has occurred, but the simple fact that the ball is spinning 
should not, by itself, be reason to consider the throw-in illegal.  
Another misconception is that the ball must be thrown with considerable force. The 
operative word is “thrown,” and as long as there is a smooth continuous motion with 
the throw, it is perfectly legal even if the ball does not travel very far from the 
thrower.  
Various techniques are employed by players when throwing in the ball. It is not 
uncommon for players to make a running throw-in. At the moment the ball is 
released, with the running throw-in, usually the toe of one foot will be dragging along 
the ground, which satisfies the requirements of the Law.  As the players advance in 
age, they may develop an acrobatic flip throw-in that can significantly increase the 
distance of the throw. This flip throw-in is legal as long as all elements of the Law 
are complied with at the moment the ball is released. 
Law 16: The Goal Kick 
 
 
AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 35 
Law 16: The Goal Kick 
 
Spirit of the Law 
A goal kick is awarded to the defending team when the ball crosses the goal line last 
touched by a member of the attacking team, without a goal being scored. 
Application 
The goal kick is a relatively simple method of restarting play and generally causes 
few difficulties. As with free kicks, the team taking the goal kick may elect to take a 
quick kick before all of the opposing team has retreated outside the penalty area as 
required. The kick is retaken if it is touched by another player before leaving the 
penalty area, or if it is touched for a second time before leaving the penalty area by 
the player taking the kick. The offside exception for the first player to receive the ball 
from a goal kick is rarely of any consequence in the younger divisions. However, in 
the older divisions, this fact must be kept in mind during those long goal kicks that 
can reach a teammate in the opponents’ half of the field. 
 

Law 17: The Corner Kick 
 
 
36 AYSO Basic Soccer Rules – 2009-2010 Edition 
Law 17: The Corner Kick 
 
Spirit of the Law 
A corner kick is awarded the attacking team after the ball crosses the goal line last 
touched by a member of the defending team, without a goal being scored. 
Application 
Corner kicks are excellent goal-scoring opportunities in the older divisions where the 
ball can be easily kicked in front of the goal from the corner area. Difficulties arise 
fairly often involving the Offside Law on corner kicks. The first person to receive the 
ball from the corner kick is, of course, exempt from the Offside Law. However, when 
a short corner kick is attempted by making a short pass from the corner arc to a 
nearby teammate, it is fairly common for this player to pass the ball back to the 
original kicker, who is running down the goal line and may be in an offside position at 
that time, depending on the position of the defenders.   
Ball Placement 
The corner arc is to be treated in the same manner as other field markings. It is not 
required that the whole of the ball be completely within the corner area. As long as 
any part of the ball is within or overhanging the corner arc lines, this is considered a 
legal placement of the ball for a corner kick. 
 
 
 
